



Rust has (or had) an asm! macro to have in-line assembler code within a function.  I think it was replaced.  I want to use something like this for a target assembler but in an indirect way.  How does this macro work with different targets.  e.g., msp430


Thought for 49s
You’re asking about three separate but tightly tangled beasts:

What happened to Rust’s inline assembly macro?

How does asm! vary by target architecture?

Could you use it as an indirect path toward a target like MSP430 or even your own assembler target?

The short shape of it
Rust’s current inline-assembly facility is asm!. It was not replaced in the sense of “gone”; rather, the old LLVM-style inline asm was moved aside as llvm_asm!, explicitly deprecated, and the newer Rust-designed asm! became the real supported direction. The RFC for that transition says the old asm! was renamed to llvm_asm!, and llvm_asm! was never intended to become stable. 

Today, Rust’s reference says inline assembly is provided by asm!, naked_asm!, and global_asm!. It also says stable support exists only for a specific set of architectures: x86/x86-64, ARM, AArch64/Arm64EC, RISC-V, LoongArch, and s390x. If you use an assembly macro on an unsupported target, the compiler errors out. 

That means the first important goblin in the machine is this:

For MSP430, asm! is not stable
The Rust platform-support list still includes msp430-none-elf as a target, but it is a low-tier bare-metal target, and the stable inline-assembly list in the reference does not include MSP430. 

The unstable-book entry for asm_experimental_arch explicitly lists MSP430 among the architectures tracked for experimental asm! / global_asm! support. 

So the current reality is:

Rust target exists: msp430-none-elf 

Stable asm! for MSP430: no 

Nightly experimental path: yes, via #![feature(asm_experimental_arch)] 

How asm! actually works across targets
Rust’s asm! is not just a string passthrough to “whatever assembler.” That would be delightfully chaotic, but Rust chose less chaos.

The compiler treats asm! as a structured interface with:

template strings

typed operands

input/output directions

register classes or explicit registers

options like nomem, readonly, nostack, noreturn, etc. 

Example shape:

unsafe {
    core::arch::asm!(
        "add {x}, {tmp}",
        x = inout(reg) x,
        tmp = out(reg) _,
    );
}
The big idea is that the Rust front end understands the operand model, and then each architecture has its own supported:

register classes

explicit register names

type constraints

special rules 

For example, the reference has architecture-specific tables for register classes and allowed value types. On x86 you get things like reg, xmm_reg, etc.; on ARM/AArch64 you get their own register classes; on unsupported targets, there is simply no stable support. 

So asm! is “portable in syntax shape,” but not portable in meaning. The template text and valid registers are architecture-dependent. Same macro, different beast.

What the compiler needs to support a target
For asm! to work on a target in a first-class way, Rust needs target-specific compiler knowledge, not just “an assembler somewhere on disk.”

At a minimum, the compiler needs to know things like:

what register classes exist

which registers are allocatable

how Rust value types map into those registers

which registers are clobbered by ABI rules

how to validate operands and constraints

how to lower the inline asm to the backend 

That means for a new custom target architecture, you generally cannot just invent your own assembly language and expect asm! to understand it. The compiler has to have target support wired in.

That is the crucial bit for your “indirect way” idea:

asm! is a bad fit for “generic target assembler plug-in”
If your dream is:

“I want one Rust macro that I can retarget to my own assembler syntax later.”

then asm! is only partially helpful.

It helps in the sense that:

it gives you a structured boundary between Rust values and assembly operands

it can keep operand passing explicit

it gives a disciplined model for in/out/clobbers/options

But it does not help in the sense of:

loading arbitrary custom assembler dialects

teaching Rust a new instruction set from a crate

plugging in a new backend assembler purely at the library level

That part lives in compiler/backend land, not macro-library land. Tiny but important dragon.

What to use instead for a custom or not-yet-supported target
If your end goal is MSP430-like or fully custom ISA work, there are a few saner routes.

1. Use external assembly files instead of asm!
This is often the least cursed path.

You can:

write .S or assembler source files

assemble them with your target toolchain in build.rs

link the resulting object files into Rust

This avoids requiring Rust inline-asm support for that target, because Rust only needs to link against the object code.

This is often the best option when:

the target’s inline asm support is unstable or missing

you have a nonstandard assembler

you’re building bring-up code, startup code, ISR veneers, or hand-written routines

2. Use global_asm! only if the target supports it
global_asm! is often better than function-local asm! when you want to write whole functions or use assembler directives more freely. But it still follows the same target-support story, and MSP430 is still in experimental territory rather than stable support. 

3. Use FFI boundaries
Put the assembly on the far side of an extern "C" function boundary and call it from Rust. This is gloriously boring, and boring is underrated.

4. For a totally custom ISA, build a compiler/backend path
If you want Rust to truly target a new ISA in a deep way, you are in one of these camps:

LLVM backend for the target

GCC backend path

custom rustc backend work

compile Rust to some intermediate form, then lower to your ISA via your own toolchain

That is much more realistic than trying to smuggle a whole architecture through asm!.

How this applies specifically to MSP430
For MSP430, the practical options today are roughly:

Option A: Nightly + experimental inline asm
Potentially workable if you want to explore and accept instability.

Conceptually:

#![feature(asm_experimental_arch)]

use core::arch::asm;

// target-specific asm would go here
But because MSP430 support is under asm_experimental_arch, you should expect paper cuts, feature churn, and docs that are less polished than for x86/ARM. 

Option B: Rust for high-level code, external assembler for low-level bits
This is the most engineering-sane route.

Use Rust for:

control logic

drivers

safe wrappers

protocol/state-machine code

Use assembly files for:

startup

interrupt entry/exit

tiny performance-critical routines

instructions Rust cannot express yet

Option C: Memory-mapped I/O and ordinary Rust
For most embedded work, you often do not need inline asm at all. GPIO, UART, I2C, timers, etc. are usually exposed as memory-mapped registers, so Rust can access them with volatile reads/writes or PAC/HAL crates. Inline asm is mostly needed for:

very special instructions

precise barriers

interrupt control

startup/runtime glue

cycle-count-critical routines

The mental model to keep
Think of asm! as:

a target-aware compiler feature with a Rust syntax front-end

not as:

a generic macro that emits arbitrary assembler text for whatever target tool you happen to have

That distinction matters a lot.

Pros and cons of using asm! for your use case
Pros
tight integration with Rust values and register allocation

explicit operand directions and clobbers

better checking than old LLVM-style syntax

good fit when target support is mature 

Cons
architecture-specific, not generic

requires compiler support per target

unsupported/still-experimental targets are awkward

poor fit for inventing a new assembler dialect from user-space

can become undefined-behavior confetti if constraints are wrong; the reference explicitly treats incorrect use of inline assembly as UB territory. 

Recommendation
For MSP430 specifically:

Use Rust as the main language.

Treat asm! as experimental/nightly-only there. 

Prefer external assembly + Rust wrappers for the lowest-level pieces.

Use memory-mapped I/O and ordinary Rust everywhere else.

For a custom target assembler / FPGA soft-core / your own ISA:

Do not build the design around asm! as the main extensibility mechanism.

Build around:

a normal Rust target/backend path if possible

or Rust + external assembler/object linking

or Rust-to-IR plus your own lowering pipeline

That gives you much cleaner architecture boundaries and fewer compiler-gremlin ambushes.

Tiny historical footnote
The thing you “think was replaced” was probably the older LLVM-flavored inline asm world. The old model was moved to llvm_asm!, deprecated, and the modern Rust-designed asm! became the supported path. 

If you want, the next useful step is for me to sketch a minimal Rust + MSP430 + external-assembly project layout, and then a second version showing where experimental asm! would fit if you decide to poke that bear with a stick.


Well, I have a msp430 to cor24 translator.  I can produce msp430 .s files from .rs files and then produce cor24 .s files from msp430 .s files.  I want to be able to do certain operations, like peeking/poking memory-mapped I/O "inline" or other simple things, but I think I am limited to the subset of msp430 I can translate to cor24 (16-bit ISA to 24-bit ISA with different register conventions).   It would be nice if I could generate actual op-codes (machine code) in-line, like a DC or EQU statement, but in code, to run non-msp430 opcodes, but this is a wishlist item.


Thought for 7s
You’ve got a very specific pipeline:

Rust → MSP430 .s → COR24 .s

and you want to sneak in a few COR24-specific low-level operations without blowing up the MSP430 subset that your translator understands.

That is a very sensible wish. The core problem is this:

Your effective ISA is not really MSP430
It’s a restricted “portable assembly dialect” consisting of:

the subset of Rust codegen that becomes MSP430 assembly,

plus the subset of MSP430 assembly your translator can map into COR24,

plus whatever calling/register conventions you can preserve along the way.

So when you say “inline,” the real question is:

Where can I inject target-specific intent without breaking the translation chain?

That leads to three increasingly powerful options.

1. The safest model: define a COR24-safe MSP430 subset
This is the boring-but-good-engineering answer.

Treat your translator boundary as a kind of pseudo-ABI and pseudo-ISA contract. Then define a tiny library of operations you know how to translate.

For example, instead of wanting “arbitrary inline opcodes,” define Rust intrinsics or wrappers such as:

peek16(addr)

poke16(addr, val)

set_bits16(addr, mask)

clear_bits16(addr, mask)

nop_cor24()

cor24_special(op, a, b) maybe later

Then force Rust to emit only patterns that your MSP430→COR24 translator already recognizes.

For memory-mapped I/O, this is often enough. A volatile read/write in Rust can compile to ordinary loads/stores, which are much easier to translate than arbitrary inline assembly.

Example shape:

#[inline(always)]
pub unsafe fn peek16(addr: *const u16) -> u16 {
    core::ptr::read_volatile(addr)
}

#[inline(always)]
pub unsafe fn poke16(addr: *mut u16, value: u16) {
    core::ptr::write_volatile(addr, value)
}
That avoids inline asm entirely for a lot of MMIO work.

This matters because Rust’s modern asm! is target-specific and only stable for certain architectures; MSP430 is still listed under experimental architecture support rather than stable inline-asm support. 

Why this is good
Rust can still optimize around ordinary code better than around asm.

Your translator only has to recognize a few stable instruction patterns.

You avoid the clown-car of backend-specific inline assembly validation.

Why it’s limited
You only get what normal Rust codegen can express.

You cannot inject truly COR24-only instructions this way.

Still, for peek/poke MMIO, this is probably your best first hammer.

2. The practical escape hatch: use recognized assembly markers in the MSP430 .s
This is the most interesting route for your setup.

Since you already own the MSP430 .s → COR24 .s translator, you can define a pseudo-assembly convention that is legal enough to survive generation, but special enough for your translator to rewrite.

In other words: don’t fight Rust too hard. Smuggle intent through the .s file in a controlled way.

Pattern A: sentinel comments
Suppose you arrange for output like:

; COR24_PEEK16 r12, 0x4000
mov &0x4000, r12
or

; COR24_RAW 0xABCD12
nop
Then your translator scans comments first and replaces the following instruction sequence with native COR24 output.

This is gloriously hacky, but also robust if you own the whole pipeline.

How to get comments in there?
This is the annoying bit. Rust’s asm! and global_asm! can emit assembly template text, but support is target-specific, and MSP430 inline asm is still experimental in Rust’s unstable architecture bucket. 

So for MSP430 specifically, relying on inline asm! to inject comment directives is probably not the nicest path.

A better way may be:

use an external .S file

or post-process emitted MSP430 assembly from specific helper functions

or have your translator recognize known function names / symbol names instead of comments

Pattern B: sentinel symbol names
This is cleaner than comments.

You create special Rust functions like:

extern "C" {
    fn __cor24_raw_abc123();
}
or:

#[no_mangle]
pub unsafe extern "C" fn __cor24_mmio_peek16(addr: u16) -> u16 {
    core::ptr::read_volatile(addr as *const u16)
}
Then your translator recognizes symbols or function bodies with those names and swaps in native COR24 code.

This gives you a sort of software trapdoor:

Rust sees a normal function.

MSP430 assembly gets generated normally.

Your translator replaces the implementation with a COR24-native sequence.

That is much saner than trying to cram raw opcodes inline.

3. The wishlist path: embed raw machine words / bytes
Now we get to the spicy goblin.

What you want is conceptually like:

assembler DC

assembler .word

assembler .byte

maybe EQU

maybe “emit this exact opcode here”

That is not crazy. Assemblers have done this since dinosaurs still had punch cards.

But there are two separate meanings:

A. Emit data into a section
This is easy in assembly, less easy “inside Rust code.”

B. Emit executable instruction words exactly at the current code location
This is what you really mean.

That is much trickier, because:

instruction encoding is target-specific,

alignment matters,

control-flow validity matters,

Rust/LLVM may reorder or optimize around code unless fenced carefully.

Rust’s assembly facilities are structured around instructions and operands; they are not really designed as a “drop raw opcode words into the current function body however you like” feature. The inline-asm RFC and reference focus on template-based target assembly with typed operands and options, not “raw machine-code blob insertion.” 

So for your pipeline, I would not try to make Rust itself the thing that emits arbitrary COR24 opcode words inside a function.

Instead, I would do one of these.

Better ways to get raw COR24 opcodes
Option 1: translator-level pseudo-op
Let your MSP430-side assembly contain a special fake directive in comments or symbols, and have the translator emit raw COR24 words.

Example pseudo-source in translated MSP430 world:

; COR24_EMITW 0x123456
Then your COR24 emitter turns that into however COR24 spells raw words.

This is probably the cleanest place for a DC-like feature, because your translator already owns the target semantics.

Option 2: special out-of-line function blobs
Create tiny standalone functions in external assembly or generated COR24 assembly and call them from Rust.

For example:

cor24_disable_interrupts()

cor24_wait_for_event()

cor24_out24(addr, value)

Your translator or linker injects the real implementation.

This preserves function boundaries and avoids “mid-function raw opcode confetti.”

Option 3: naked functions / global asm later
Rust has global_asm! and naked_asm! as part of its inline assembly family, but again support is target-specific, and MSP430 lives in the experimental bucket, not the stable one. 

So in principle, whole-function assembly is a better fit than tiny inline snippets, but for MSP430 specifically that still sits on squishier ground than you probably want.

EQU versus DC: important distinction
These are different beasts.

EQU
EQU is basically symbol definition / constant binding.

You do not need assembly for that most of the time. Rust const, static, #[repr(C)], and plain numeric constants already cover much of that territory.

Example:

const GPIO_OUT: *mut u16 = 0x4000 as *mut u16;
That is your moral equivalent of a lot of EQU usage.

DC / .word / .byte
That is literal data or instruction encoding emission.

This is the bit that belongs much more naturally in:

external assembly,

linker scripts in some cases,

or your translator’s output stage.

So I would separate the wish list like this:

Need symbolic addresses? Rust constants are fine.

Need actual raw emitted words in code? Do that in the translator or in external assembly, not in Rust source proper.

Recommended architecture for your pipeline
Here’s the design I’d use.

Layer 1: “portable Rust subset”
Use ordinary Rust for:

control flow

arithmetic

most state machines

MMIO reads/writes via volatile loads/stores

fixed helper functions

This gives you the maximum amount of Rust you can keep.

Layer 2: “translator-recognized intrinsic functions”
Define a tiny set of special functions whose bodies or names your translator recognizes:

__cor24_peek16

__cor24_poke16

__cor24_emit_special_1

__cor24_barrier

__cor24_rawtrap_N

These can initially compile as boring MSP430-compatible code, then your translator upgrades them into native COR24 sequences.

That gives you a migration path from boring to powerful without changing Rust call sites.

Layer 3: “raw opcode escape hatch”
Add a translator-only pseudo-op mechanism using:

comments,

symbol names,

or a special no-op instruction pattern

Example idea:

#[inline(always)]
pub unsafe fn cor24_opcode_foo(arg: u16) {
    core::hint::black_box(arg);
}
Generated assembly pattern is recognized by the translator and replaced with raw COR24 code.

That keeps the raw emission mechanism out of the Rust language surface.

How I would avoid painting yourself into a corner
There are a few traps here.

Trap 1: depending on exact Rust codegen shapes
If your translator recognizes very specific MSP430 instruction sequences emitted by Rust, a compiler upgrade may wreck your day.

Better:
recognize symbol-level contracts or tiny helper functions with stable names, not arbitrary instruction soup.

Trap 2: trying to inline everything
Inlining feels elegant until it becomes a haunted forest of register conventions.

Since COR24 has different register conventions than MSP430, tiny out-of-line helper functions may actually be cleaner, because your translator can rewrite the whole function prologue/body/epilogue consistently.

Trap 3: mixing semantic layers
Do not let “Rust source,” “MSP430 asm subset,” and “COR24 raw opcodes” all leak into one another chaotically.

Use named abstraction boundaries:

normal Rust functions

special intrinsic-like Rust wrappers

translator replacements

optional external assembly blobs

That way each layer stays legible.

My blunt recommendation
For what you described, I would do this:

First
Use volatile pointer reads/writes for MMIO peek/poke wherever possible.

Second
Create a tiny COR24 intrinsic shim library in Rust:

pub unsafe fn cor24_peek16(addr: u16) -> u16;
pub unsafe fn cor24_poke16(addr: u16, value: u16);
pub unsafe fn cor24_special0(x: u16) -> u16;
Initially, implement them in plain Rust or portable MSP430-friendly code.

Third
Teach your translator to recognize those functions by symbol name and replace their bodies with COR24-native instruction sequences.

Fourth
Add a translator pseudo-op for raw word emission only when you truly need it.

That gives you the power of “inline-ish” target-specific operations without depending on unstable MSP430 inline assembly support in Rust. MSP430 is still listed under experimental architecture support for asm! / global_asm!, not the stable inline-asm set. 

The key insight
You do not actually need Rust inline asm to solve this problem.

What you need is a well-defined escape hatch in your translation pipeline.

Since you own the translator, that is where the magic should live. Rust just needs a disciplined way to name the intent.

That is much sturdier than trying to convince Rust/MSP430 inline assembly to become a secret COR24 machine-code injector. That way lies entertaining nonsense and eventually a long night with objdump.

The next sensible step is to sketch a concrete design for:

a Rust API for cor24_peek16/poke16/special,

the MSP430 assembly patterns that would be easiest for your translator to recognize,

and a replacement strategy for COR24 code emission.




