



I want to be able to compile a integer subset of Rust to a 24-bit target microprocessor using nostd.  I want to be able to specify addresses for memory-mapped I/O and possible issue assembler instructions.  What is the simplest way to do this?  I'm looking for something quick and dirty.  We could compile to a wasm 32bit target, and then translate that to 24-bit assembler.  This would require a way to communicate more information to the translator and possibly to a linker and loader.  I can imagine using Rust macros to encode information that is lost when compiling to WASM (like hardware addresses, op codes in asm! macros in unsafe blocks).  Need a creative way to prototype this as a proof of concept.  Why?  I have an emulator and an assembler and sample C-to-assembler listings, but no access to the C compiler or dev board yet.  I want to create Rust examples that blink LEDs and do register operations in 24 bit in an emulator.  The input to the emulator is assembler output (.o).  The input to the assembler is "cor24" ISA assembler (.s).  I want .rs -> .wasm + .json -> .s -> .o


Thought for 5s
You want a quick-and-dirty path from:

subset of Rust (no_std) → .wasm + metadata.json → cor24 .s → .o

with these constraints:

integer-only Rust subset

memory-mapped I/O at explicit addresses

occasional raw target opcodes / target assembly escape hatches

enough structure to blink LEDs and poke registers in your emulator

not a full production compiler backend, just a proof-of-concept that gets to “machine wiggles bits” fast

The blunt recommendation
The simplest proof-of-concept is not a real Rust backend.

The fastest path is:

Compile a very restricted Rust subset to wasm32-unknown-unknown with #![no_std]

Use a companion proc-macro / attribute system to emit target metadata into JSON

Write a tiny translator from wasm + metadata → cor24 assembly

Use a small runtime ABI that avoids most of Rust’s fancy furniture

That gives you a believable .rs -> .wasm + .json -> .s -> .o pipeline without wrestling LLVM backend work, GCC plugins, or rustc internals. Rustc is a dragon cave. For a POC, do not go spelunking there unless you enjoy smoke and sorrow.

Architecture
High-level design
You need three layers:

1. Rust source layer
A restricted dialect of Rust using:

#![no_std]

#![no_main]

only fixed-width integers (u8, u16, u32, maybe i32)

no heap

no traits unless trivial

no generics at first

no slices unless you really need them

no panics except abort

no references crossing complicated boundaries

no function pointers at first

You expose MMIO and raw target ops through macros or wrapper APIs.

2. Metadata side channel
Because wasm will lose hardware intent, you emit a JSON sidecar that records:

symbolic MMIO register names and addresses

width / volatility / access mode

special instructions requested by macros

linker section hints

entrypoint name

interrupt/vector metadata later, if needed

3. Translator/backend
Your custom tool reads:

the generated .wasm

the generated metadata.json

and lowers a small subset of wasm ops into cor24 .s, then invokes your assembler to produce .o.

Why this is the simplest workable route
Why not write a real rustc backend?
Because that is a huge rat’s nest for a POC.

You’d have to deal with:

target description

calling convention

codegen backend

relocations

linker expectations

inline asm support

panic/abort/runtime details

rustc/LLVM interface weirdness

That is the “correct” long-term route, but absolutely not the “blink LED by next weekend” route.

Why not compile Rust AST directly to cor24 assembly?
That is actually even simpler in principle for a tiny subset, but it stops being Rust surprisingly fast. You end up writing a toy compiler that merely wears Rust’s hat.

Still, it is worth considering as an alternative later.

Why wasm is a decent dirty intermediate
Wasm gives you:

stack machine IR

fixed integer ops

structured control flow

easy parsing from Rust

no OS baggage

reasonably deterministic output for a small subset

It is not perfect for 24-bit targets, but for integer/control-flow lowering it is a perfectly respectable sacrificial goat.

Nonfunctional requirements
For your POC, optimize for:

Simplicity
Everything should be easy to inspect:

wasm text (wasm2wat) if needed

JSON metadata

emitted .s

Determinism
Generated assembly should be stable enough that you can compare outputs between runs.

Debuggability
You want to be able to say:
“this Rust expression became these wasm ops, which became these cor24 instructions.”

Explicitness
Do not try to infer too much magic from Rust syntax. Use attributes/macros where needed.

No hidden runtime
Avoid anything that requires allocator, unwinding, or libc.

Recommended proof-of-concept approach
Phase 1: define a tiny Rust subset
Use only:

fn main() -> !

local integers

let, if, loop, while

arithmetic: + - & | ^ << >>

comparisons

function calls with integer params/returns

loads/stores via explicit MMIO wrapper APIs

optional inline target op marker macros

Avoid for now:

match unless you map it carefully

arrays

structs except maybe simple repr(C) register blocks later

borrows/references in generated code paths

enums

formatting / panic messages

anything involving compiler-builtins beyond basics

Phase 2: use a tiny runtime crate
Example shape:

#![no_std]
#![no_main]

use cor24_poc::{mmio_read8, mmio_write8, cor24_opcode, entry};

const LED_REG: u32 = 0x00FF10;
const CTRL_REG: u32 = 0x00FF20;

#[entry]
fn main() -> ! {
    mmio_write8(CTRL_REG, 0x01);

    loop {
        mmio_write8(LED_REG, 0x01);
        delay(1000);
        mmio_write8(LED_REG, 0x00);
        delay(1000);

        cor24_opcode!("nop");
    }
}

fn delay(mut n: u32) {
    while n != 0 {
        n -= 1;
    }
}
This is the sweet spot: it still looks like Rust, but you keep the “hardware truth” in obvious places.

The crucial design choice: metadata side channel
Wasm will not naturally preserve things like:

“this constant is an MMIO address”

“this function is really the entrypoint”

“this macro means emit a target-specific instruction here”

“this store must be volatile”

“put this symbol in a special section”

So you need a sidecar file.

Example metadata JSON
{
  "entry": "main",
  "mmio": [
    {
      "symbol": "LED_REG",
      "address": 65296,
      "width": 8,
      "volatile": true,
      "access": "rw"
    },
    {
      "symbol": "CTRL_REG",
      "address": 65312,
      "width": 8,
      "volatile": true,
      "access": "rw"
    }
  ],
  "intrinsics": [
    {
      "kind": "opcode",
      "site_id": "main:17:9",
      "text": "nop"
    }
  ]
}
That gives your translator the semantic breadcrumbs wasm itself discards.

How to emit the metadata
There are three plausible ways.

Option A — proc macros that write metadata
You use attribute/proc macros like:

#[entry]

mmio_write8!(LED_REG, 1)

cor24_opcode!("nop")

These macros record metadata during build.

Problem
Proc macros writing files directly can be clunky and impure.

Option B — macros expand into dummy symbols or custom sections
This is cleverer.

You make macros expand into items placed in custom sections or static blobs that survive into wasm. Then your translator reads them back out of the wasm custom/data sections.

Example idea:

#[link_section = ".cor24.meta"]
#[used]
static META_LED_REG: [u8; N] = *b"{...json...}";
This can work beautifully for a POC.

Why I like this
It avoids messy out-of-band filesystem coordination. The metadata rides inside the build artifact like a smug little stowaway.

Option C — build script scans source files
A build.rs parses source using syn and emits JSON.

Problem
It becomes fragile fast, especially once macros or modules get involved.

Recommendation
Use Option B:

macros emit metadata records into custom sections

translator extracts them from wasm

translator also emits a friendly external .json if you want inspectability

That is delightfully hacky in the good way.

MMIO design
You need MMIO operations to be explicit and easy to lower.

Best quick-and-dirty API
Use functions/macros like:

mmio_write8(ADDR, VALUE)
mmio_read8(ADDR)
mmio_write24(ADDR, VALUE)
mmio_read24(ADDR)
or maybe:

write_reg8!(0x00FF10, 0x01);
let x = read_reg8!(0x00FF11);
Why not raw pointers?
You can do:

unsafe { core::ptr::write_volatile(LED_REG as *mut u8, 1) }
but then your wasm lowering gets murkier, and you lose the chance to preserve intent cleanly.

For a POC, explicit intrinsics/macros are much nicer.

Good compromise
Have the public API look slightly Rusty:

pub fn mmio_write8(addr: u32, value: u8);
pub fn mmio_read8(addr: u32) -> u8;
but implement them as known intrinsics in your translator rather than real Rust functions.

Target-specific instruction escape hatch
You said you may need to issue assembler instructions.

That means you need an escape hatch that survives compilation.

Simple pattern
cor24_opcode!("nop");
cor24_opcode!("sei");
cor24_opcode!("out {}, {}", "r1", "r2");
For the first POC, keep it brutally simple:

allow only literal strings

translator inserts them verbatim into .s

That is not pretty, but it gets work done.

Safer version later
Later, support typed intrinsics like:

cor24::nop();
cor24::wait();
cor24::set_flag();
These are easier to validate than freeform assembler strings.

Calling convention and ABI
This matters more than people expect. Tiny compiler projects often die here in a puddle.

For the first POC:
Define a hilariously small ABI.

Suggested ABI
one return register, maybe r0

first 2–4 integer arguments in registers

spill rest to stack

stack grows downward

caller saves most registers

callee preserves a tiny fixed set

Keep it simple and document it in one page. Your translator owns both sides, so you can choose whatever makes your emulator happy.

Entrypoint
Use one dedicated entry symbol:

#[entry]
fn main() -> ! { ... }
Translator maps that to emitted symbol like:

.global _start
_start:
    call main
hang:
    jmp hang
or directly uses main as the reset vector if your assembler format supports it.

24-bit values: the annoying goblin
Your target is 24-bit. Rust and wasm are not.

Wasm gives you i32, i64, etc. Rust gives you u8/u16/u32, but not u24.

Easiest rule
Represent target 24-bit integers as masked u32.

Every cor24 value lives in low 24 bits:

after arithmetic ops, insert & 0x00FF_FFFF when needed

loads/stores of 24-bit values use target-specific lowering

comparisons use masked values where necessary

Important design choice
Do not try to invent a Rust u24 type first. That rabbit hole gets fluffy and annoying.

Instead:

treat u32 as carrier type

translator knows some values are semantically 24-bit

for MMIO widths, metadata tells you 8/16/24

This is ugly, but functional.

Wasm subset to support
For a first translator, support only these wasm instructions:

local.get

local.set

local.tee

i32.const

i32.add

i32.sub

i32.and

i32.or

i32.xor

i32.shl

i32.shr_u

i32.eqz

i32.eq

i32.ne

i32.lt_u

i32.gt_u

i32.le_u

i32.ge_u

block

loop

br

br_if

if

else

call

return

Try very hard to avoid general wasm memory loads/stores at first.

Instead, lower only:

locals

arithmetic

explicit intrinsic calls like mmio_write8

That keeps the translator small and sane.

Why avoiding wasm memory initially is smart
The moment you start supporting general linear memory:

addresses

alignment

stack frame layout

data section lowering

pointer aliasing weirdness

The complexity jumps.

For blinking LEDs and register pokes, you do not need that mess yet.

Recommended source-level API design
I’d create a crate like cor24_poc with:

Attributes
#[entry]

Macros or intrinsics
mmio_read8(addr)

mmio_write8(addr, value)

mmio_read24(addr)

mmio_write24(addr, value)

cor24_opcode!("...")

Optional later
#[cor24(addr = 0xFF10, width = 8)] static LED: Mmio<u8>;

#[interrupt] fn timer0() { ... }

But not yet. Static register-block APIs are nice, but they add lowering complexity.

Build pipeline
Cargo target
Compile to:

cargo build --target wasm32-unknown-unknown
with:

panic = "abort"

lto = false initially for inspectability

opt-level = 0 or 1 while debugging the translator

Then translator
Your custom tool:

cor24-trans code.wasm -o code.s
or:

cor24-trans target/wasm32-unknown-unknown/debug/blink.wasm \
  --meta-extract \
  -o blink.s
Then assembler
cor24-as blink.s -o blink.o
Low-level translator strategy
Internal representation
Do not lower wasm directly to text assembly one opcode at a time if you can avoid it.

Use a tiny IR:

LoadConst dst, imm
Move dst, src
BinOp op, dst, lhs, rhs
Call name, args, ret
Branch label
BranchIf cond, label
Label name
MmioWrite width, addr, value
MmioRead width, addr, dst
RawAsm "nop"
Return val
Then emit .s.

Why this helps
It gives you a place to:

normalize stack-machine wasm into pseudo-register ops

insert 24-bit masks

allocate simple temporaries

inspect/debug more easily

That tiny IR will save you pain.

Handling wasm’s stack machine
Wasm is stack-based; your target probably is not.

Easiest lowering method
Simulate the wasm stack with virtual temporaries:

each stack push creates a temp like t3

each op pops temps and creates a new temp

later assign temps to physical registers / stack slots

For a POC, you can do a very dumb register allocator:

use a handful of scratch regs

spill aggressively

optimize nothing

A gloriously stupid allocator is totally fine here.

How to preserve source-level intent
You mentioned using Rust macros to encode information that is lost in wasm. That instinct is exactly right.

Good candidates for metadata annotations
MMIO register declarations

volatile read/write width

raw opcodes

sections

symbol names that must survive

fixed addresses

vector table entries later

Example macro idea
cor24_mmio!(LED_REG, 0x00FF10, u8);
cor24_mmio!(CTRL_REG, 0x00FF20, u8);
This can expand to:

a const address

metadata in custom section

Then code can use:

mmio_write8(LED_REG, 1);
That’s a nice balance of ergonomics and explicitness.

The quick-and-dirty alternative that may actually be even faster
Now for the heresy: if you truly want the shortest route to success, consider skipping wasm entirely for v0.

Alternative v0
Parse a tiny subset of Rust using syn, and emit cor24 assembly directly.

Supported subset:
one file

functions

integer locals

if, while, loop

arithmetic

calls to known MMIO intrinsics

raw asm macro

Why this might be faster
Because your subset is tiny, and Rust source is more semantically expressive than wasm. You do not fight the wasm stack machine or rustc lowering artifacts.

Why this might be worse
Because it is less “real.” You aren’t compiling Rust so much as interpreting a Rust-shaped DSL.

My actual judgment
If your goal is engineering exploration of a future toolchain, use the wasm path

If your goal is blink an LED in the emulator by tomorrow, use the direct syn-to-asm path

For a POC, the direct parser route is scandalously effective.

Pros and cons of the wasm route
Benefits
uses real rustc front-end/type-checking

keeps Rust syntax honest

more future-proof

lets you incrementally support more of the language

avoids writing a full parser/type system yourself

Risks
wasm lowering may produce shapes you did not expect

even simple Rust can compile into surprisingly fussy wasm

preserving hardware semantics requires metadata hacks

debug cycle is longer than direct source-to-asm

Pros and cons of direct Rust-subset parsing
Benefits
smallest conceptual system

easiest to control emitted assembly

no need to decode wasm

easiest to attach source-level semantics like MMIO

Risks
not really “Rust compiler,” more “Rust-ish transpiler”

subset will be fragile

you will eventually hit parsing/type/lowering cliffs

less reusable if you later want bigger programs

What I would build first
I would do this in three tiny milestones.

Milestone 1 — no wasm memory, no raw pointers
Support only:

integer locals

integer arithmetic

function calls

loops

mmio_write8

mmio_read8

cor24_opcode!("nop")

Demo:

blink LED

write/read control register

busy-loop delay

Milestone 2 — 24-bit discipline
Add:

mmio_read24

mmio_write24

24-bit masking after arithmetic

comparisons on masked values

Demo:

increment 24-bit register

read status bits

branch on status

Milestone 3 — small static data / constants
Add:

readonly constants section

optional arrays or small tables

very limited linear memory support if truly needed

Demo:

pattern table for LED chasing

small state machine

Practical Rust configuration
You’ll want something like this:

#![no_std]
#![no_main]

use core::panic::PanicInfo;

#[panic_handler]
fn panic(_info: &PanicInfo) -> ! {
    loop {}
}
And in Cargo.toml:

[profile.dev]
panic = "abort"

[profile.release]
panic = "abort"
For the early POC, avoid inline asm!. Since you’re not targeting your real architecture in rustc, it won’t help much anyway. Use your own macro markers instead.

Concrete crate split
I’d use a tiny workspace:

cor24-poc-runtime
Defines:

#[entry]

mmio_*

cor24_opcode!

metadata-emission helpers

cor24-poc-trans
Reads wasm/custom-sections and emits .s

examples/blink
Your first target app

That separation keeps the weirdness contained.

Example source style I’d recommend
#![no_std]
#![no_main]

use cor24_poc::{entry, mmio_write8, mmio_read8, cor24_opcode, reg8};

reg8!(LED,  0x00FF10);
reg8!(CTRL, 0x00FF20);
reg8!(STAT, 0x00FF21);

#[entry]
fn main() -> ! {
    mmio_write8(CTRL, 1);

    loop {
        mmio_write8(LED, 1);
        delay(3000);

        let s = mmio_read8(STAT);
        if (s & 1) != 0 {
            cor24_opcode!("nop");
        }

        mmio_write8(LED, 0);
        delay(3000);
    }
}

fn delay(mut n: u32) {
    while n != 0 {
        n -= 1;
    }
}
That is readable, explicit, and translator-friendly.

How the translator can recognize intrinsics
There are two sane methods.

Method 1 — function import names
Compile helper functions as extern/import-like well-known names and map them in the translator.

Example symbolic names:

cor24_mmio_write8

cor24_mmio_read8

cor24_raw_opcode

Method 2 — metadata IDs in custom sections
Macros emit a site marker and the translator uses that to splice the right assembly.

Best for v1
Use both ideas lightly:

known intrinsic function names for structure

custom metadata section for extra details like raw opcode strings and declared register names

A tiny example lowering
Rust:

mmio_write8(LED, 1);
Possible wasm-ish intent:

push address constant

push value constant

call intrinsic

Translator emits:

    mov r0, #0x00FF10
    mov r1, #0x01
    store8 [r0], r1
Rust:

let s = mmio_read8(STAT);
if (s & 1) != 0 { ... }
Translator emits:

    mov r0, #0x00FF21
    load8 r1, [r0]
    and r1, r1, #1
    bz r1, .Lelse0
    ; then-block
.Lelse0:
That’s the sort of clean output you want.

A very important simplification
For the first working version, forbid general pointers.

That includes:

&mut

arbitrary *mut T

pointer arithmetic

normal Rust references used for memory manipulation

Why? Because once Rust starts lowering ordinary memory operations into wasm linear memory ops, your translator complexity balloons.

Use only explicit MMIO intrinsics and integer locals. That’s plenty for LED blink and register fiddling.

Best tooling choices
Rust-side
cargo

wasm32-unknown-unknown

syn only if you build source helpers or a fallback parser

serde_json for metadata

maybe wasmparser or walrus for reading wasm

Translator-side
I’d use Rust here too, because it plays nicely with the rest of your setup.

Useful crates:

wasmparser for low-level control

serde / serde_json

anyhow

clap

wasmparser is a good fit if you want minimal, explicit decoding.

The trap to avoid
Do not try to support “normal Rust” too early.

That means no:

borrowing as an abstraction layer for registers

fancy generic HAL traits

embedded-hal compatibility first

safe register wrappers with lots of zero-cost abstractions

automatic lowering of arbitrary unsafe pointer code

That is how quick-and-dirty projects become long-and-sulky projects.

Keep the subset ugly and obvious at first.

My recommendation in one sentence
Build a tiny no_std Rust DSL disguised as normal Rust, compile it to wasm32-unknown-unknown, stash hardware semantics in custom-section metadata, and write a deliberately dumb translator that only understands the wasm opcodes your examples actually use.

That will get you to .rs -> .wasm + metadata -> .s -> .o with the least ceremonial suffering.

If you want the truly shortest path
Here is the most pragmatic ranking:

Fastest to first success
Direct syn-parsed Rust subset → cor24 assembly

Rust → wasm + metadata → cor24 assembly

Real rustc target/backend

LLVM backend / full inline asm support

Best balance of “real” and “achievable”
Rust → wasm + metadata → cor24 assembly

That’s the one I’d pick given your stated pipeline.

Suggested repo layout
Something like:

cor24-rust-poc/
  Cargo.toml
  crates/
    cor24-poc-runtime/
    cor24-poc-trans/
  examples/
    blink/
      src/main.rs
  docs/
    abi.md
    wasm-subset.md
    metadata-format.md
First demo target
Your first success criterion should be absurdly modest:

write CTRL = 1

loop:

write LED = 1

delay

write LED = 0

delay

Then a second demo:

read STAT

mask a bit

branch

emit one raw opcode

That’s enough to prove the whole toolchain concept.

Final judgment
Your idea is sane as a prototype, especially the notion of using Rust macros/custom metadata to preserve semantics lost in wasm. That is the key trick.

The simplest POC is:

restrict the Rust subset brutally

ban general pointers and most memory

make MMIO explicit through intrinsics/macros

embed metadata in custom sections

translate only the wasm instructions you actually need

That gets you a compact, inspectable, hackable pipeline without having to build a cathedral just to blink an LED.

I can sketch the exact cor24_poc API, metadata format, and translator IR next, or produce a minimal Cargo workspace skeleton for this design.


I like your alternatives, thanks.  Here's another (probably not easy) approach:  what if we wrote a WASM runtime in cor24 assembler?  Rust would compile to WASM.  The cor24 assembler would have to provide a minimal runtime for heap, stack and importantly emulating 32 bit ops on a 24 bit machine.  How hard is this?  Also is there a Rust-to-C transpiler?  Because I may get acces to a C-to-cor24-assembly compiler.


Thought for 6s
You’re exploring two escape hatches:

Run Rust-generated WASM on cor24 by implementing a tiny WASM runtime/VM in cor24 assembly

Transpile Rust to C, then rely on a future C→cor24 compiler

Both are plausible as experiments, but they are very different beasts.

High-level verdict
For a quick proof of concept, a full WASM runtime in cor24 assembly is usually harder than it first sounds. It is possible, but the pain is not “parse some opcodes and go home.” The hard parts are:

emulating 32-bit arithmetic on a 24-bit machine

implementing enough WASM semantics to satisfy Rust-generated code

dealing with stack frames, locals, control flow, calls, and memory model

possibly needing pieces of Rust’s expected runtime behavior depending on what subset you compile

By contrast, Rust→C can be attractive if the future C compiler is decent and if your Rust subset is heavily constrained. But the Rust→C landscape is not mature in the way C→Rust is. C2Rust exists, but it goes the other direction: C to Rust, not Rust to C. 

Option A: Write a WASM runtime in cor24 assembly
What you are really building
There are two versions of this idea:

1. A WASM interpreter / VM
You store wasm bytecode or a decoded form and execute it instruction by instruction.

2. A WASM-to-cor24 ahead-of-time translator plus tiny runtime
You translate wasm ops to cor24 assembly beforehand, and only keep helper routines for things like 32-bit math and memory operations.

For your use case, #2 is much saner.

A true interpreter is elegant in theory but often terrible on tiny targets. You pay a big performance tax and you still have to implement the semantics. Tiny machines are where elegant abstractions go to chew gravel.

How hard is a WASM interpreter on a 24-bit CPU?
The hard parts
1. WASM is built around 32-bit and 64-bit integer ops
Even a tiny Rust subset compiled to wasm will tend to use i32 freely, because wasm’s natural integer width is 32-bit. That means your cor24 runtime must emulate:

add/sub on 32-bit values

bitwise ops

shifts

comparisons

loads/stores

sign/zero extension behavior

On a 24-bit machine, every 32-bit value becomes at least a multiword object, probably split across two storage units or some packed convention. That infects almost every arithmetic op.

2. WASM is a stack machine
You need:

operand stack

locals

call frames

block/loop/if control tracking

branch targets

That is all doable, but it is a fair amount of machinery before the LED even thinks about blinking.

3. Rust-generated wasm is not “toy language” wasm
Rustc is not trying to make life easy for your 24-bit emulator. It is trying to generate correct wasm for wasm. Even with #![no_std], panic abort, and a tiny subset, the output may still include patterns that force you to support more of wasm than you hoped.

4. Memory model
You need at least:

linear memory

stack region

globals or a globals table

probably some conventions for static data

If you allow mutable statics or even slightly richer code later, this gets fatter.

What makes it easier
If you control the Rust subset aggressively, the idea becomes less insane.

A workable subset would be:

#![no_std], #![no_main], panic = "abort"

only integer locals and scalar arguments

no heap

no slices/references except in tightly controlled intrinsics

no trait-heavy code

no formatting

no general pointer arithmetic

MMIO only through explicit intrinsics

no 64-bit integers

ideally no general wasm memory ops at first

Then your “runtime” is really a small support library for translated wasm, not a general-purpose wasm engine.

The practical split I’d recommend
Instead of “write a wasm runtime in cor24 assembly,” do this:

Better variant
Compile Rust to wasm

Parse wasm on the host

Lower each supported wasm instruction to cor24 assembly

Call helper routines for difficult operations:

__i32_add

__i32_shl

__i32_cmp_eq

__load8

__store8

maybe __mmio_write8

That means you are not interpreting wasm at runtime; you are using wasm as a portable IR. This is much more tractable.

Difficulty estimate
If you mean a real interpreter/VM:

Hard

likely several times more work than it first appears

easy to get something running, harder to get Rust-generated wasm running reliably

If you mean AOT translation from wasm to cor24 + helper runtime:

Moderate for a tiny subset

quite plausible as a hobby proof-of-concept

much better engineering payoff

Option B: Rust → C transpiler
Is there a Rust-to-C transpiler?
There is no mainstream, official Rust→C path from the Rust project. The official compiler does not provide a standard C backend. 

What does exist is a scruffy zoo of partial or specialized efforts:

mrustc is an alternative Rust compiler project associated with bootstrapping; public discussions and project descriptions characterize it as a tool aimed at compiling Rust via generated C/C++-side infrastructure for bootstrapping purposes, not as a polished general-purpose everyday Rust→C workflow. 

rs2c exists, but it is explicitly a very WIP Rust to C transpiler with a limited feature set. 

There are community posts about newer experimental Rust→C compiler backends, but these are not established production routes. 

So the answer is:

Yes, sort of.
But not in the comforting “use this mature toolchain and move on with your life” sense.

The big asymmetry: C→Rust is mature-ish, Rust→C is not
Tools like C2Rust are for translating C into Rust, not the reverse. Its own documentation says it translates C99-compliant code into Rust. 

That is a useful clue about ecosystem maturity:

C→Rust has real tooling momentum

Rust→C is still much more experimental

Which approach is easier?
For a small, controlled subset:
Easiest overall
Rust subset → custom translator directly to cor24 assembly

That is still the least magical path.

Second easiest
Rust subset → wasm → host-side translator → cor24 assembly

This is nice if you want real Rust parsing/type-checking and a reasonably structured IR.

Third
Rust subset → C → C compiler → cor24 asm
This can be attractive only if:

your available C compiler turns out to be solid

your Rust→C stage can produce simple enough C

you restrict the Rust subset brutally

Hardest
General WASM interpreter/runtime on cor24

That is the coolest-looking idea and also the one most likely to become an archaeology site of clever half-working machinery.

Why Rust→C may still be useful for you
Even though Rust→C is not mature as an ecosystem, conceptually it aligns well with your situation because:

you already expect a C→cor24 path may exist

C is closer to “portable assembly with types”

you may be able to generate deliberately boring C:

no heap

no structs beyond simple layouts

explicit integer widths

no recursion

explicit MMIO helper calls

That could work well for LED blinking, register pokes, polling loops, and simple state machines.

The catch
A Rust→C transpiler that supports “normal Rust” is hard for the same reason Rust is Rust:

ownership and borrowing

layout assumptions

aliasing differences

pattern matching and enums

traits/generics

panic semantics

references and lifetimes collapsing into C pointers

Those are exactly the reasons community discussions describe Rust→C transpilation as difficult in general. 

But for your tiny subset, you can dodge most of that.

A practical hybrid plan
Here is the route I would actually recommend.

Plan A — best engineering balance
Rust subset → wasm → cor24 asm
Use host-side translation, not a target-side wasm VM.

Why:

real Rust frontend

no need for a mature Rust→C transpiler

cleaner control of MMIO metadata

easier to inspect and debug than a VM

Plan B — ultra-pragmatic fallback
Rust-like DSL or tiny Rust subset → boring C → C→cor24 compiler
If you get access to a decent C toolchain, this could become the fastest path to producing real target assembly.

In that model, do not wait for a general Rust→C transpiler to save you. Instead:

write your own tiny source translator for a very small subset

emit intentionally simple C

use explicit helper macros for MMIO and raw target ops

That is less glamorous, but much more likely to finish before the heat death of the universe.

What would a tiny C output style look like?
Something like:

#include <stdint.h>

#define MMIO8(addr) (*(volatile uint8_t *)(addr))

static void delay(uint32_t n) {
    while (n != 0) {
        n--;
    }
}

int main(void) {
    MMIO8(0x00FF20) = 1;

    for (;;) {
        MMIO8(0x00FF10) = 1;
        delay(1000);
        MMIO8(0x00FF10) = 0;
        delay(1000);
    }
}
If your future C compiler can handle this kind of thing well, a Rust-subset-to-C path becomes a lot more plausible.

My honest difficulty ranking
For your specific goal—blink LEDs and do register operations in an emulator—

Writing a full wasm runtime in cor24 assembly
Difficulty: high

Because:

you must implement too much execution machinery

32-bit-on-24-bit emulation will spread everywhere

debugging will be gnarly

Writing a host-side wasm-to-cor24 translator plus helper routines
Difficulty: medium

Because:

still nontrivial

but the scope can be tightly controlled

best balance of “real Rust” and “doable”

Using Rust→C with an eventual C compiler
Difficulty: medium to high, depending on the transpiler

low-ish if you write your own tiny Rust-subset-to-C emitter

high if you hope a mature general Rust→C tool already exists and will solve it for you

Bottom line
On the WASM-runtime idea
It is possible, but for a 24-bit target it is usually the wrong kind of hard for a quick-and-dirty prototype. A host-side wasm→cor24 translator is much more sensible than a target-side wasm VM.

On Rust→C
There is no standard mature official Rust→C transpiler. There are experimental efforts, and mrustc is relevant historically for bootstrapping, while rs2c is explicitly still very WIP. C2Rust is the opposite direction. 

Best pragmatic move
Treat both wasm and C as intermediate languages you control, and restrict the Rust subset hard enough that your backend remains small and obvious.

The machine does not care about ideological purity. It cares that the LED blinks.

I can next sketch a concrete comparison matrix for these four routes:

Rust subset → direct cor24 asm

Rust subset → wasm → cor24 asm

Rust subset → C → cor24 asm

wasm VM/runtime on cor24

with estimated implementation phases, risks, and “first LED blink” time.


So treating WASM as an IR and translating its 32 bit ops to 24 bit might work, but is a different target better for this approach, say ARM, RISC-V, etc.  (I've written similar LED-toggling Rust code to run native on Arduio, Raspberry Pi, ESP32-C3, etc.  Is there a better ISA than WASM for this approach?

Yes. WASM is workable, but it is probably not the best IR for your particular goal.

Your real requirement is not “portable sandboxed execution.” It is:

start from a restricted Rust subset

preserve low-level intent

lower to a weird 24-bit target

support memory-mapped I/O

support target-specific instructions

keep the implementation small enough to finish before the stars burn out

For that, the best IR is the one that minimizes semantic mismatch with your target and with your translator budget.

High-level conclusion
If you want the simplest translation logic, then WASM is usually not the best choice.

For your use case, I would rank likely IR choices like this:

Best fit for a quick prototype
C as IR

LLVM IR

RISC-V RV32I or ARM Thumb assembly/MC as IR

WASM

JVM/.NET-style bytecode

A full native backend project

That ranking is not about elegance. It is about how much semantic wrestling you must do to get from “Rust-ish source” to “24-bit machine wiggles LEDs.”

What makes a “good IR” for your target?
A good intermediate form for this job should have most of these properties:

Desirable properties
1. Explicit low-level operations
You want integer arithmetic, branches, calls, loads, stores, shifts, masks, compares.

2. Easy mapping to a nonstandard machine
A 24-bit target is already oddball territory. The IR should not force too many hidden assumptions:

32-bit native regs everywhere

strict runtime model

fancy stack semantics

strong memory model baggage

3. Easy preservation of hardware intent
You care about:

MMIO addresses

volatile accesses

raw instructions / special opcodes

section placement

symbol names

4. Easy inspection and debugging
You want to read the IR and say:
“yes, that add/store/branch is what I meant.”

5. Small translator surface
The number of constructs you must support should stay tiny.

Why WASM is not ideal here
WASM has some real strengths:

simple-ish stack machine

compact integer/control-flow model

easy parsing

Rust can target it today

no OS assumptions

But for your case, it has several annoyances.

Problems with WASM as IR
1. It is a stack machine
Your translator has to recover something register-ish or temporary-ish from stack ops:

push

pop

local.get

local.set

block/loop/br structure

That is doable, but not especially natural for a tiny backend.

2. It assumes 32-bit and 64-bit integer worlds
Your target is 24-bit. So almost every i32 op becomes:

multi-step lowering

masking discipline

carry/borrow care

possible helper routines

That would also happen with ARM/RISC-V IR, but with WASM you also pay the stack-machine tax.

3. MMIO and hardware semantics are not naturally represented
WASM does not “mean” MMIO. It just has memory accesses and calls. You end up needing side channels or special intrinsics.

4. Rust→WASM may generate shapes you do not love
Even tiny Rust can compile into structured control flow and local patterns that are correct but not especially pleasant for a simple custom lowering pipeline.

When WASM is still good
WASM is good when:

you want a portable, constrained, parseable IR

you are okay writing a translator

you heavily restrict the Rust subset

you want to piggyback on an existing rustc target without touching rustc internals

So: usable, but not optimal.

Is ARM or RISC-V a better IR?
Short answer
Sometimes, yes.

If by ARM or RISC-V you mean:

compile Rust to a normal 32-bit target

inspect the generated low-level code

translate that low-level code into cor24

then that can be a better fit than WASM in some ways.

But it depends on what level you capture.

There are three possibilities:

A. Use ARM/RISC-V machine code as IR
Not ideal.

B. Use ARM/RISC-V assembly as IR
Better, but still messy.

C. Use the kind of semantics embodied by a load/store RISC machine as the design model for your own tiny IR
This is often the sweet spot.

Comparing candidates
Option 1: WASM as IR
Benefits
Rust target exists now

no_std friendly

easy to parse

stable enough for experiments

typed instructions

Drawbacks
stack machine

32-bit bias

MMIO intent lost unless annotated

structured control flow needs lowering

Verdict
Good if you want “real Rust frontend, small custom backend” and can tolerate mismatch.

Option 2: ARM Thumb as IR
Benefits
register-based

close to embedded mental model

lots of examples from embedded Rust

load/store/branch/call are natural

easier to imagine mapping to a simple 24-bit CPU than wasm stack ops

Drawbacks
once you use actual ARM assembly as IR, you inherit ARM-specific assumptions:

register count

condition flags

calling convention

instruction idioms

literal pools

translating one ISA to another is often more annoying than it sounds

Verdict
Better than WASM if the ARM output is simple and constrained, but still not ideal as a literal IR.

Option 3: RISC-V RV32I as IR
Benefits
beautifully minimal integer ISA

regular instruction set

fewer weird historical barnacles than ARM

load/store arithmetic branch model is clean

nice for building translators

easier to reason about systematically

Drawbacks
still assumes 32-bit registers

still real-ISA baggage

Rust output may include ABI/runtime patterns you must handle

actual machine-code translation is still ISA-to-ISA translation

Verdict
Of the real ISAs, RV32I is probably the nicest conceptual IR.

If I had to choose a real ISA as a donor model, I would pick RV32I over ARM for cleanliness.

Option 4: C as IR
This one is less glamorous and more practical.

Benefits
very easy to inspect

easy to preserve intent through intrinsics/macros

can represent MMIO naturally

easy to generate from a restricted source subset

can be fed to a future C compiler

works well for structured control flow and simple integer code

Drawbacks
not a canonical backend IR from rustc

semantics can get slippery with undefined behavior if you are careless

if you hope for “general Rust→C,” the ecosystem is thin soup

Verdict
For a quick proof of concept, C is often better than WASM.

Option 5: LLVM IR
This is the serious grown-up answer.

Benefits
SSA form (single static assignment), which is lovely for compilers

explicit loads/stores/arithmetic/calls/branches

much closer to backend work

easier than wasm for many optimization/lowering tasks

easy to attach metadata

no stack-machine nonsense

Drawbacks
harder to generate/use cleanly unless you already live comfortably in LLVM land

Rust does not give you a super ergonomic “just use LLVM IR as your public interface” workflow

still a fairly big ecosystem dragon

Verdict
If you are comfortable with compiler guts, LLVM IR is probably a better IR than WASM for this job.

But for “quick and dirty,” it may be more setup than you want.

My actual recommendation
Best conceptual choice
Build your own tiny pseudo-RISC IR, inspired by RV32I, not WASM.

That is the move I would make if the goal is to finish a translator that stays understandable.

Why?
Because your target wants things like:

load

store

add

sub

and/or/xor

shift

cmp

branch

call

ret

raw opcode

mmio_read/mmio_write

That is already almost a tiny RISC IR.

So instead of translating:

Rust -> WASM -> cor24

you might prefer:

Rust -> something existing -> tiny custom IR -> cor24

or even:

Rust subset / source annotations -> tiny custom IR -> cor24

A practical hybrid that makes sense
Here is a very sane architecture:

Pipeline
Compile Rust to WASM or C or LLVM IR

Translate that not directly to cor24 assembly, but to your own tiny IR

Lower tiny IR to cor24 assembly

Tiny IR example
Something like:

fn main:
  t0 = const 0x00FF20
  t1 = const 1
  mmio_store8 t0, t1

L0:
  t2 = const 0x00FF10
  t3 = const 1
  mmio_store8 t2, t3
  call delay(1000)
  t4 = const 0x00FF10
  t5 = const 0
  mmio_store8 t4, t5
  call delay(1000)
  br L0
That gives you:

one stable lowering target

easy debug output

easy 24-bit masking rules

freedom to swap frontends later

This is compiler-engineering common sense with less ceremonial wig.

If you insist on choosing an existing ISA as IR
Pick RISC-V over ARM
If the candidates are ARM vs RISC-V vs WASM, I would lean:

Best existing ISA donor
RISC-V RV32I

Why RV32I wins
cleaner and smaller base ISA

fewer special cases

less historical weirdness

easier to pattern-match and translate

easier to document as a compiler target model

Why ARM is less ideal
ARM/Thumb is ubiquitous and practical, but it brings:

flags-heavy idioms

instruction encoding quirks

mode/ABI/toolchain complexity

more architecture personality leaking into your translator

Why WASM may still beat both in one narrow way
Rust already targets it trivially, and it is easy to parse. So it wins on frontend convenience, not on backend pleasantness.

A useful distinction: “IR source” vs “IR shape”
There is a subtle but important difference.

IR source
What existing thing do you generate from Rust?

WASM

C

LLVM IR

ARM asm

RISC-V asm

IR shape
What form is easiest for your translator?

probably a small, register-like, SSA-ish or temp-based IR

The smartest design is often:

choose the most convenient source IR

normalize it into the most convenient internal IR

For you, that might mean:

Variant A
Rust -> WASM -> tiny temp-based IR -> cor24

Variant B
Rust subset -> C -> tiny temp-based IR -> cor24

Variant C
Rust subset -> LLVM IR -> tiny temp-based IR -> cor24

Of those, A is the easiest to start, C is probably the most elegant technically, and B may be the most pragmatic if you really do get a usable C path.

What I would do in your shoes
Given your goals and temperament, I would pick one of these two:

Route 1: Fastest “real Rust” experiment
Rust -> WASM -> tiny custom IR -> cor24

Use WASM only as a front-end artifact, not as the real IR of your backend.

Why
easy to get from rustc

enough structure

no rustc backend hacking

you can normalize away the stack-machine ugliness once

Route 2: Cleanest translator design
Restricted Rust-like source -> tiny custom IR -> cor24

Especially if you only need:

blink LEDs

register ops

simple loops

small functions

This may beat every “existing target as IR” choice, because it avoids accidental complexity.

My direct answer to your question
Is there a better ISA than WASM for this approach?
Yes, probably.

Better as a conceptual model
RISC-V RV32I

Better as a practical quick-and-dirty IR source
C, if you can control the subset and/or later use a C compiler

Better as a serious compiler IR
LLVM IR

Best compromise if you want to use rustc today without backend work
WASM, but normalize it into your own IR quickly

Final recommendation
Do not marry the external IR.

Treat WASM, C, ARM, or RISC-V as merely feedstock. The important move is to create a tiny internal IR that matches cor24’s reality:

explicit temporaries

explicit widths

explicit MMIO

explicit branches/calls

explicit 24-bit masking rules

explicit raw-op escape hatch

If you want an existing ISA to imitate, imitate RV32I. If you want an existing frontend artifact you can get from Rust easily, use WASM. If you want the easiest thing to inspect and perhaps eventually feed into your future compiler, use C.

The most important compiler lesson here is gloriously unromantic: the best IR is the one that makes the ugly parts occur once, in one place, under your control.

I can sketch a tiny cor24-oriented internal IR next and show how the same LED blink program would look when normalized from WASM vs from RV32I-like ops.


So, this 24-bit (RISC, BTW) architecture is a creation of a colleague, and is implemented in FPGA for "reasons."  I, personally, am more interested in 16-bit or even 8-bit (or maybe even 12-bit!) ISAs,  inspired by IBM 1130, RCA 1802, and RISC-V I32.  So, is there an existing Rust target for any ISA below 32 bits?  If there was a supported 16-bit microprocessor target, it would be easier (I hope) to genrealize from 16 bit "up" to 24 bit.  I have two goals: add Rust as a target language for my colleagues 24-bit dev boards, and to be able to create my own ISAs, smaller than 32 bits -- to build an IBM 1130 emulator in software and/or FPGA and program that in Rust.  or make my own RISC-V I16 toy.


Thought for 41s
Yes — there are existing Rust targets below 32 bits, and that matters.

Direct answer
The two built-in sub-32-bit targets worth caring about are:

msp430-none-elf — a 16-bit MSP430 bare-metal target, listed in Rust’s platform support table as no_std-only. 

avr-none — a bare-metal AVR target, also no_std-only, listed as Tier 3 and documented separately in the rustc book. 

So the answer to “does Rust support anything below 32 bits?” is yes. The ecosystem is not lush and fragrant, but it exists.

High-level design implications
You have two goals:

Add Rust support for your colleague’s 24-bit FPGA RISC target

Use Rust for your own smaller experimental ISAs — 16-bit, 12-bit, maybe even 8-bit-flavored toys, IBM 1130-ish or a toy “RISC-V I16”

Those are related, but not identical.

The strategic question
You are really asking:

Is it easier to bootstrap from an existing sub-32-bit Rust target than from a 32-bit one?

My answer
Yes for learning and architecture intuition, only partly yes for implementation.

A 16-bit target helps you learn how Rust behaves when:

pointers are smaller

usize is smaller

no_std is mandatory

atomics may be absent or limited

the backend already lives in “tiny machine country”

That is useful. Rust has explicitly supported 16-bit pointer sizes in the compiler for years, and the release notes even called that out as groundwork toward AVR support. 

But your 24-bit target is still weird in a unique way:

unusual pointer width

unusual ABI

likely no upstream LLVM backend

probably custom linker/assembler/runtime story

So a 16-bit target helps you understand the neighborhood, but it does not magically pave the road to 24-bit.

What sub-32 Rust targets exist today?
1. MSP430: the cleanest “real 16-bit” answer
Rust’s platform support table currently lists:

msp430-none-elf — 16-bit MSP430 microcontrollers, marked * for no_std. 

That makes MSP430 the most obvious “official-ish” stepping stone if your interest is:

genuine 16-bit addressing model

tiny embedded systems

compiler behavior below 32 bits

Why MSP430 is useful conceptually
It teaches you about:

16-bit usize / pointer world

tiny memory assumptions

stripped-down runtime expectations

“Rust, but small and odd”

Why MSP430 is not your 24-bit answer
Because MSP430 is still a real existing ISA with its own backend story, not a generic “small-width compiler kit.”

2. AVR: the 8-bit family answer
Rust also documents avr-none as a built-in target, Tier 3, for AVR microcontrollers such as ATmega-class devices. The rustc book states that Rust “comes with AVR support enabled,” but building requires avr-gcc, and some intrinsics like 32-bit multiplication still rely on libgcc. 

The platform support table also lists avr-none as a no_std target and notes that it requires -Zbuild-std=core and -Ctarget-cpu=.... 

Why AVR is interesting
It is below 32 bits in a very real sense.

It forces you to think about tiny register files, tiny RAM, and code size misery.

It is closer to the “8-bit weird machine” energy you seem to enjoy.

Why AVR is a mixed blessing
AVR is charming, but codegen for an 8-bit machine gets ugly fast. You end up learning a lot about compiler suffering, which is educational, but not always pleasant.

Is a supported 16-bit target a better stepping stone to 24-bit?
Benefits
Starting with a real 16-bit target gives you experience with:

no_std discipline

reduced-width pointers and usize

missing or limited atomics

tiny-target codegen pathologies

linker scripts / memory maps / startup code

MMIO patterns in a constrained environment

That is all relevant to your 24-bit board. It is not the same problem, but it rhymes.

Limits
What does not carry over cleanly:

a 24-bit pointer width

a custom ABI

a custom assembler / object format

unusual calling convention choices

“RISC but hand-rolled in FPGA for reasons”

That last bit is deliciously honest, by the way. FPGA-for-reasons is how a lot of very interesting monsters are born.

What would I use as your stepping stone?
For “learn from an existing sub-32 target”
Pick MSP430 first.

Why:

it is genuinely 16-bit

it gets you closer to IBM 1130-ish mental territory than AVR does

it teaches small-pointer assumptions more directly

it is a cleaner conceptual bridge to a 24-bit word/address model than 8-bit AVR

For “study what pain Rust has on very small machines”
Also look at AVR.

Why:

it exposes backend pain sharply

it keeps you honest about code size and runtime assumptions

it is useful if you ever want a toy 8-bit Rust story

For your IBM 1130 / custom ISA ambitions
This is where the answer gets more interesting.

IBM 1130 angle
The IBM 1130 is a 16-bit machine, but it is not just “some 16-bit RISC-like microcontroller.” It has its own architecture, instruction formats, addressing behavior, I/O conventions, and historical quirks. So:

MSP430 is a good Rust-small-target study platform

it is not a good semantic model for IBM 1130

If your endgame is:

IBM 1130 emulator in software and/or FPGA

and eventually program it in Rust

then there are really two different projects hiding in one trench coat:

Project A
Use Rust as the host implementation language to build:

emulator

assembler

linker

loader

simulator tooling

This is easy and sensible.

Project B
Make IBM 1130 itself a Rust compilation target

This is much harder, because then you need:

target spec

backend/codegen strategy

ABI

startup/runtime conventions

probably a Rust subset

maybe custom object/output story

For a toy or hobby system, that second one is usually better approached as:

Rust subset → custom IR → target asm
or

Rust subset → C/WASM/LLVM IR → custom lowering

rather than “teach full rustc/LLVM to love 1960s architecture.”

About a toy “RISC-V I16”
This is where I’ll push back a bit: RISC-V I16 is not really a standard thing.

Rust’s platform table includes a bunch of 32-bit RISC-V bare-metal targets, including:

riscv32i-unknown-none-elf

riscv32e-unknown-none-elf

riscv32em-unknown-none-elf

riscv32emc-unknown-none-elf 

The RV32E family is especially interesting because it keeps the ISA 32-bit but reduces the register set, which is a nice “smaller machine” stepping stone without inventing a new width. 

Why RV32E may be smarter than “RISC-V I16”
If your goal is educational / toy-ISA design, RV32E gives you:

official-ish tooling ecosystem

Rust target support

simpler embedded profile

fewer registers

less compiler misery than a genuinely nonstandard 16-bit RISC-V derivative

So for “tiny RISC-like Rust experiments,” RV32E is a more realistic stepping stone than inventing a 16-bit RISC-V dialect from scratch. 

The key implementation question: how would you target your own ISA?
There are three realistic approaches.

Approach 1: Custom rustc target spec
Rust supports custom target specifications via JSON, and the rustc book documents this. It also warns that the target JSON properties are not stable and recommends pinning the compiler version. 

This is useful when:

your target is close enough to an existing backend / LLVM architecture

you mainly need to tweak data layout, linker flavor, panic/runtime assumptions, etc.

Good for
variants of existing supported architectures

experiments with custom ABI / memory layout

Not enough for
a brand-new 24-bit ISA with no backend

IBM 1130

a made-up 12-bit or 16-bit toy ISA

Because JSON target specs do not conjure a backend out of vacuum. They configure; they do not perform necromancy.

Approach 2: Rust subset → IR → custom backend
For your custom 24-bit / 16-bit / 12-bit machines, this is still the most practical route.

Why
you control the subset

you control MMIO / special ops

you avoid full rustc backend work

you can evolve from “blink LED” to “small real program”

This remains my favorite answer for your colleague’s 24-bit board.

Approach 3: Full backend / LLVM / Cranelift path
This is the glorious cathedral route:

expensive

educational

slow

eventually powerful

For a hobby ISA or one-off FPGA board, this is often overkill unless the target becomes a long-term platform.

My recommendation by goal
Goal A: Add Rust to colleague’s 24-bit FPGA board
Use:

restricted Rust subset

probably WASM or C or LLVM IR as feedstock

a custom internal IR

custom lowering to your assembler / object flow

Do not wait for an upstream-quality backend unless this project is growing fangs and a community.

Goal B: Explore your own 16-bit / 8-bit / 12-bit ISAs
Use existing targets to learn:

MSP430 for 16-bit small-target Rust behavior 

AVR for 8-bit small-target pain and delight 

RV32E / RV32I as the “tiny but still civilized” reference model 

Then build your own compiler path as:

Rust subset → custom IR → toy ISA

That will get you much farther, much faster, than trying to force rustc to emit native code for a 12-bit whimsy-beast too early.

Bottom line
Yes, Rust already has sub-32-bit targets
The important ones are:

msp430-none-elf for 16-bit MSP430 

avr-none for AVR, with caveats and Tier 3 status 

Is 16-bit a better stepping stone than 32-bit?
Yes, conceptually. It helps you learn the small-target world.
No, not magically. Your 24-bit and custom-ISA problems still remain custom.

For your broader ambitions
Study MSP430 and AVR for intuition.

Study RV32E/RV32I for clean RISC design with Rust support. 

For your own oddball ISA targets, plan on a Rust subset + custom backend pipeline, not a full “official Rust target” on day one.

The compiler lesson here is wonderfully rude: once you go below 32 bits, the universe stops handing out free lunches and starts charging interest in ABI edge cases.


Another aspect is inspired by newer Raspberry Pi's PIO "engines".  I'd like to play with an FPGA to create a combination of PIO-like state machines and a combination of 8, 12, and 16 bit ISAs, with the idea of being able to fake multi-processors doing many things at once. a hybrid controller test bed, that I can emulate and develop using Rust tool-chain, and especially macros.

You want a hybrid controller playground:

FPGA-based

some blocks are PIO-like state machines

some blocks are tiny CPUs with 8-, 12-, and 16-bit ISAs

the whole thing should feel like a swarm of little workers doing things concurrently

you want to emulate it, synthesize it, and program it from a Rust-centered toolchain

and especially use Rust macros to describe hardware actions, protocols, and tiny programs

That is a very good idea. Slightly mad, but the productive kind of mad.

High-level take
This is much more promising than trying to make “Rust for arbitrary tiny ISA” a monolithic compiler problem.

Instead, think of it as a heterogeneous micro-engine platform with three layers:

Control-plane language: Rust on the host

Micro-engine DSLs: Rust macros that describe tiny programs / state machines

Execution targets:

emulator

FPGA bitstream components

assembler / microcode / ROM images for each engine

That architecture plays to Rust’s strengths:

parsing and macro expansion

type-checked builders

code generation

host-side tooling

simulation harnesses

And it avoids forcing rustc itself to directly target every little oddball core.

Recommended architecture
1. Treat the FPGA system as a fabric of engines
Not one CPU. Not one ISA. A fabric.

Each engine belongs to one of a few classes:

A. PIO-like engines
Best for:

bit-banging protocols

waveform generation

sampling pins

timing-sensitive bus glue

simple state transitions

Characteristics:

tiny instruction memory

deterministic timing

little or no stack

mostly register + shift + branch + wait + pin ops

B. Tiny compute engines
Best for:

counters

filters

protocol parsing

state machines that are a bit richer than PIO

arithmetic / control logic

These can be:

8-bit

12-bit

16-bit

C. Host supervisory core
Could be:

a soft RISC-V

a real MCU off-chip

or just your PC talking to the FPGA during development

This layer loads programs, inspects state, injects events, and coordinates engines.

The right mental model
Do not think of this as “many tiny CPUs”.

Think of it as:

A hardware orchestra
Where different instruments have different sheet music forms.

PIO engine: percussion, timing, pulse trains

8-bit engine: simple rhythmic motifs

12-bit engine: weird jazz goblin

16-bit engine: the grown-up who can do arithmetic without crying

host Rust tooling: the conductor and score editor

That means your toolchain should unify them at the description level, not necessarily at the ISA level.

Best design principle
Use Rust as the meta-language, not always the target language
This is the key move.

Instead of demanding:

“compile ordinary Rust directly into every engine”

use Rust to generate:

PIO microcode

tiny ISA assembly

ROM contents

register maps

FPGA config tables

simulator test vectors

debugger metadata

That is far more achievable and far more fun.

Proposed software stack
Layer 1: Host crate workspace
I would split this into a workspace like:

hybrid-fabric/
  crates/
    fabric-core/
    fabric-emu/
    fabric-asm8/
    fabric-asm12/
    fabric-asm16/
    fabric-pio/
    fabric-macros/
    fabric-build/
    fabric-debug/
  examples/
    blink_fabric/
    uart_bridge/
    stepper_demo/
    ibm1130_panel_mock/
Layer 2: Common intermediate model
Define a common representation for all engines:

struct EngineId(u16);

enum EngineKind {
    Pio,
    Cpu8,
    Cpu12,
    Cpu16,
}

struct ProgramImage {
    engine: EngineKind,
    words: Vec<u32>,   // logical container, width interpreted per engine
    symbols: Vec<Symbol>,
    debug: DebugInfo,
}
This gives you one place to manage:

loading

debugging

disassembly

symbol names

tracing

Layer 3: Per-engine DSLs
Each engine type gets a small Rust DSL.

For PIO-like engines
Something like:

let prog = pio_program! {
    start:
        wait pin 0 high;
        set pins, 0b0001;
        delay 10;
        set pins, 0b0000;
        jmp start;
};
For 8-bit CPU
let prog = isa8_program! {
    start:
        load r0, #1;
        store [LED], r0;
        call delay;
        load r0, #0;
        store [LED], r0;
        call delay;
        jmp start;

    delay:
        load r1, #200;
    loop1:
        sub r1, #1;
        bne loop1;
        ret;
};
For 12-bit / 16-bit
Same idea, different width rules and instruction sets.

This is where macros shine: they let you stay in Rust while authoring tiny assembly-like programs with labels, constants, register names, pin names, and structured errors.

Why macros are a very good fit
Rust macros are perfect for:

1. Declarative embedded DSLs
You can create:

pio_program!

isa8_program!

regmap!

fabric!

route!

pinmux!

2. Static validation
At compile time, macros can catch:

bad register names

immediate out of range

unknown labels

wrong instruction for engine class

illegal pin references

width mismatch

3. Metadata generation
Macros can emit:

ROM image blobs

symbol tables

debug maps

disassemblers

emulator registration tables

That is a huge win.

Example of the really powerful idea
You do not merely want tiny programs. You want a whole fabric definition.

A fabric macro could look like this
fabric! {
    engine p0: Pio at 0x0000 {
        pins = [gpio0, gpio1, gpio2];
        clock_div = 4;
        program = pio_program! {
            start:
                wait pin gpio0 high;
                set pins, 0b001;
                delay 5;
                set pins, 0b000;
                jmp start;
        };
    }

    engine c8a: Cpu8 at 0x1000 {
        regs = 8;
        program = isa8_program! {
            start:
                load r0, #1;
                store [0x20], r0;
                jmp start;
        };
    }

    route gpio2 -> c8a.irq0;
    route c8a.out0 -> p0.pin1;
}
Now you are not just writing code. You are defining a little machine society.

That is the good stuff.

Nonfunctional requirements
For this project, the most important qualities are:

Determinism
Especially for PIO-like engines.
You want cycle-accurate or close-to-cycle-accurate simulation.

Composability
Engines should be pluggable.

Inspectability
At all times, you want to see:

registers

pins

FIFOs

program counters

cycle counts

events

Low ceremony
If it takes 20 files to blink one pin, the toy has escaped the toy box.

Gradual realism
Start with emulator-first, then lower into FPGA implementations.

Best development methodology
Phase 1: Emulator-first
Before FPGA, build:

engine trait interfaces

per-engine interpreters

shared timebase

event scheduler

pin and bus model

trace capture

This lets you:

test designs fast

iterate on ISA ideas

debug macros and assemblers

Phase 2: Macro + assembler maturity
Build stable DSLs and assemblers that generate:

ROM init data

debug symbols

disassembly

test fixtures

Phase 3: FPGA mapping
Implement the engines in HDL with matching semantics.

Phase 4: Hardware/software co-design loop
Use the Rust emulator as the reference model for the FPGA blocks.

That is the path of least heartbreak.

A concrete engine model
I would define a common trait like:

trait Engine {
    fn reset(&mut self);
    fn step(&mut self, fabric: &mut FabricView);
    fn load_program(&mut self, image: &ProgramImage);
    fn state(&self) -> EngineStateSnapshot;
}
Then implement:

PioEngine

Cpu8Engine

Cpu12Engine

Cpu16Engine

Each step() consumes one cycle or one micro-step.

The fabric simulator coordinates them.

The crucial design question: shared memory or message passing?
You want “fake multiprocessors doing many things at once.”

There are two main ways to model communication.

Option A: Shared memory
Simple and familiar.

Benefits
easy mental model

CPUs can inspect shared state

good for software-style experiments

Risks
contention

harder timing reasoning

concurrency bugs sneak in like raccoons

Option B: Message passing / FIFOs / events
Better match for mixed hardware fabrics.

Benefits
deterministic

composable

maps well to hardware

easier to reason about latency and ownership

Risks
more explicit plumbing

less “normal CPU” feeling

Recommendation
Use message passing by default, with tiny shared memory windows only when needed.

For PIO-style engines especially, FIFOs and events are natural.

Suggested communication primitives
Your fabric should probably have:

pins: single-bit or small buses

mailboxes: one-word async message registers

FIFOs: producer/consumer streams

shared RAM: optional, small

interrupt/event lines

timers

That gives you most of what you need for protocol experiments and hybrid control.

About the ISA mix: 8, 12, and 16 bits
This is a good idea if each width has a role.

8-bit engine
Use for:

control loops

counters

simple GPIO sequencers

tiny bus controllers

Keep it extremely small:

4–8 registers

tiny immediate ops

branch

load/store

call/ret optional

12-bit engine
This is the odd duck, which makes it interesting.

Use for:

compact control with slightly wider data

fixed-point experiments

retro-ish DSP-ish toy behavior

compact instruction encoding playground

A 12-bit ISA is weird enough to be educational without becoming unusable.

16-bit engine
Use for:

more serious arithmetic

address calculations

supervisory logic

more comfortable compiler experiments

This is your best candidate for “compile a Rust subset to it later.”

PIO-like engines are not just tiny CPUs
Do not blur them too much.

PIO-style engines should have features that normal small CPUs often lack:

wait pin

set pins

shift in/out

side-set-style parallel output

exact cycle timing

delay slots / explicit stall fields

automatic FIFO coupling

branch on pin/input flags

That makes them superb for protocol edges, where general CPUs are often clumsy.

How Rust should fit into this
There are three roles for Rust here.

1. Rust as the host language
This is the main role.
Use it for:

emulator

assemblers

DSL macros

fabric builder

test harnesses

code generators

disassemblers

2. Rust subset as source for some engines
Especially the 16-bit engine, maybe later the 12-bit one.

But do this only after your ISA and emulator settle down.

3. Rust macros as hardware authoring language
This is the most exciting role.

Macros can define:

programs

engines

fabrics

pin maps

bus routing

MMIO blocks

protocol sequences

test stimuli

That gives you a single coherent development experience.

A practical macro roadmap
I would build macros in this order:

First
regmap!
For symbolic addresses and bitfields.

regmap! {
    LED = 0x20 : u8;
    STATUS = 0x21 : u8 {
        READY: 0,
        ERROR: 1,
    }
}
Second
pio_program!
Because it is compact and rewarding.

Third
isa8_program!, isa12_program!, isa16_program!
Simple assembly-like DSLs.

Fourth
fabric!
Top-level system description.

Fifth
trace_expect!
For tests.

trace_expect! {
    after 100 cycles:
        pin gpio2 == 1;
        engine c8a.pc == 0x12;
}
That would be deliciously useful.

Testing strategy
You absolutely want a simulation-first workflow.

Good tests include:
single-engine instruction tests

assembler round-trip tests

cycle-by-cycle trace comparisons

pin waveform golden tests

fabric interaction tests

property tests for encoders/decoders

For PIO-style blocks, waveform comparison is especially powerful.

This can become an “executable architecture notebook”
A very nice long-term outcome is:

one Rust workspace

one set of DSLs

one emulator

several tiny engines

generated docs and diagrams

examples that run in host simulation first

optional export to FPGA ROM images and HDL config

That becomes a laboratory for:

retro-inspired architecture ideas

protocol engines

concurrency experiments

compiler experiments

IBM 1130-ish controller ideas

toy RISC-V-ish subsets

That is a rich vein.

Risks and traps
Trap 1: trying to compile ordinary Rust too soon
Resist it.
First make the tiny engines pleasant to program via DSLs and macros.

Trap 2: too many ISAs too early
Start with:

one PIO engine

one 8-bit engine

one 16-bit engine

Add 12-bit only once the infrastructure is solid.

Trap 3: shared memory everywhere
Prefer FIFOs, messages, and explicit wires/events.

Trap 4: FPGA-first
Do emulator-first.
FPGA debugging is where optimism goes to get electrocuted.

Trap 5: overdesigning the ISA
Your first ISA should be almost embarrassingly small.

What I would build first
MVP
A host-side Rust simulator with:

1 PIO-like engine

1 tiny 8-bit engine

shared pin fabric

mailbox or FIFO between them

pio_program! and isa8_program! macros

waveform trace output

Demo
PIO engine samples a pin pattern and pushes bytes into a FIFO

8-bit engine reads FIFO and toggles LEDs or updates a counter

all visible in trace output

That proves:

concurrency model

engine composition

DSL viability

simulation timing

Second demo
A 16-bit engine supervises two smaller engines:

loads config words

starts/stops them

reads status

Now you have the “fake multiprocessor” feel.

Best long-term language strategy
For your stated interests, I would not aim for:

“Rust directly targets every engine”

I would aim for:

“Rust is the architecture workbench, simulator language, macro system, and code generator.”

Then, later:

16-bit engine gets a Rust-subset compiler

maybe 12-bit gets a special fixed-point subset

PIO remains DSL-authored

That division of labor is sane.

Bottom line
Your idea is strong because it shifts the problem from:

“make Rust support every weird CPU natively”

to:

“use Rust to describe, simulate, assemble, and orchestrate a family of tiny concurrent engines”

That is much more achievable, and much more interesting.

My recommended first architecture
Rust host simulator

PIO-like DSL

8-bit control ISA

16-bit supervisory ISA

mailboxes/FIFOs instead of broad shared memory

macros for programs, regmaps, and fabric topology

That gives you a credible path toward:

FPGA implementation

emulation

hybrid controller experimentation

later Rust-subset compilation for selected engines

and eventually retro or custom-ISA experiments like IBM 1130-inspired systems

The sneaky truth is that this becomes less a “compiler project” and more a hardware-software co-design laboratory. Which is, frankly, cooler.

I can turn this into a concrete repo plan next: directory tree, crate responsibilities, macro names, and a phase-by-phase MVP roadmap.



