---

Address space is 24 bits, or 16 MB, not 64 KB

I wouldn't say there are 8 GP registers, only r0, r1, and r2 can be used
very generally, the stack pointer and frame pointer have very specific
uses and can't be used to do many of the things you can do with r0, r1,
and r2. I would say that there are 3 GP registers.

"z" register, yes it is register #5, but you can only address it as "z"
in compare instructions, it is always zero, and it is not
zero/condition, it's just a zero accessible to the compare instructions

Instructions are 1, 2, or 4 bytes long, they are not ever 3 bytes long

20260303--
Here is a listing that shows how the PC relative displacement works.
Keep in mind that the PC is, at the time the instruction executes, two
ahead of the next instruction. So at label "brtest", the branch to
"start", the PC is already 4, add 2 to get to 6. At "start", by the time
that executes, the PC is 8 + 2, or 10, so we need -10 to get back to 0.
At "next", the PC is 6 + 2, so we need -4 to get back to 4.

PC always points to the instruction BEING fetched now, we are in the
execute stage of an instruction once it has been fetched, and decoded,
so by the time we have fetched and able to use the displacement in the
branch, the next instruction (if it didn't branch) is 2 bytes ahead of
the branch instruction, and the PC is two bytes ahead of that.

Of course when we know we are branching, we tell the instruction fetch
stage to stop pre-fetching ahead, and to start again with the new
address we give it. Then execution starts again once that fetch and
decode have happened.

Confusing I know but this was my choice to let the pipeline stages
communicate simply, and stay autonomous when they can.


20260304--
asld24.zip wants to unpack files into ./asld24.

You need to be on some Linux system, with a C compiler and related tools (like "make") installed.

From the ./asld24 directory, type make.

If they build properly, then get this asld24 directory into your path.

There are two test files here, "fib.s" and "sieve.s".

For either one, you can do as24 -l <file>.s, and you'll get the listing you want. If you leave off the -l, it will follow the assembly with the linker, and try to make a COR24 executable (load and go monitor script). "fib.s" will fail, because you don't have a COR24 C library installed, and it won't find "printf". But "sieve.s" has its I/O built in, it will link without error. You'll see a bunch of monitor load commands, followed by a go command, put out to the console. Of course you can redirect this output. There is also a -o switch. If you pipe the output through "longlgo", you get a nice compact file with all the load commands that can be, consolidated into longer lines.

For example:

as24 sieve.s | longlgo

O.k. try this and get in touch if things don't work as expected.

----
